Add Permissions Chip article (#2065)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/blog/permissions-chip/index.md

  dedicated space in the location bar for permissions, with the goal of putting all
  permissions-related UI (prompts, indicators, and controls) in the same place and thereby making
  the prompts less demanding to reduce the perceived insistence on a decision.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2022-02-01
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/K7jiiutmZA0DvzGU9irA.jpg
alt: Computer user in front of a desktop computer.
tags:
  - chrome-97
---

## The permissions UX until now

When a user visits a site that requests a permission, a bubble pops up to prompt the user to make a
decision. For example, below you can see the geolocation permission prompt as implemented in Chrome
up to version 96. (You can try this and other permissions on our demo site
[permission.site](https://permission.site/).)

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/dVZNzWjq3wBsRY4E7ShO.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="690", height="432" %}

### Most permission prompts are ignored or dismissed

Chrome's telemetry data proves that a lot of permission prompts are ignored. You can explore the
[notification permission data](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2020/02/notification-permission-data-in-crux)

> in the Chrome UX report yourself, but, as an immediate example, consider the table below that shows
> in an accumulated way how Windows users reacted to the geolocation and the notification prompts:

Author: ```suggestion
in the Chrome UX report yourself. For now, consider the table below that shows
how Windows users reacted to the geolocation and the notification prompts on sites in an accumulated way:
```

  the prompts less demanding to reduce the perceived insistence on a decision.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2022-02-01
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/K7jiiutmZA0DvzGU9irA.jpg
alt: Computer user in front of a desktop computer.
tags:
  - chrome-97
---

## The permissions UX until now

When a user visits a site that requests a permission, a bubble pops up to prompt the user to make a
decision. For example, below you can see the geolocation permission prompt as implemented in Chrome
up to version 96. (You can try this and other permissions on our demo site
[permission.site](https://permission.site/).)

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/dVZNzWjq3wBsRY4E7ShO.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="690", height="432" %}

### Most permission prompts are ignored or dismissed

Chrome's telemetry data proves that a lot of permission prompts are ignored. You can explore the
[notification permission data](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2020/02/notification-permission-data-in-crux)
in the Chrome UX report yourself, but, as an immediate example, consider the table below that shows

> in an accumulated way how Windows users reacted to the geolocation and the notification prompts:

Author: I have split and rephrased slightly.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Action</th>
<th>% of Geolocation Prompts</th>
<th>% of Notification Prompts</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Allow</td>
<td>8.09%</td>
<td>6.69%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Block</td>
<td>6.47%</td>
<td>9.20%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dismiss</td>
<td>36.12%</td>
<td>35.76%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ignore</td>
<td>49.22%</td>
<td>47.19%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

Given this ignore/dismiss rate of ~85%, and especially given how much the prompt stands out and
insists on users making a decision immediately, there is a conflict between the level of urgency
assumed by the browser versus the user's preference for waiting to make a decision. This creates the
perception that it's "annoying" for a site to ask for a permission.

## New design

From Chrome 97 on, we therefore introduced an animated chip UI which appears next to the lock
whenever a permission is requested. This consists of an icon and label of the permission being
requested. Our aim was to improve the experience of web browsing without being distracted by
(generally unnecessary) permission requests for the vast majority of users who ignore or dismiss the
current prompt.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/SsFtKKnZzbkAovNkX4Lt.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="653", height="229" %}

Author: Added.

The existing prompt bubble will be shown when the request chip is clicked (if not already shown) and
the request UI is automatically augmented with the request bubble based on the heuristics listed
below:

- The permission was triggered through a user gesture when interacting with the site itself rather
  than automatically triggered by the site.
- The permission is deemed essential and generally non-spammy. Currently this includes camera,
  microphone, and camera paired with microphone.

### Flow of the new design

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/amp4hx5iei2FvfXFt8gK.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="445" %}

Author: I have split the diagram into two now. (The compare widget is for Do/Don't, but in this case it's just two independent flows.)

For non-essential permissions not triggered by a gesture, the prompt no longer intrudes on the site
contents, and is not insistent on an immediate decision. The user can ignore the request chip until
they have enough information to make a decision.

With no interaction, after a short delay, the request chip will automatically collapse to just a
blocked icon (to indicate the permission being temporarily blocked), before being dismissed
entirely. The aim is to get out of the way of users who choose not to make a decision and can do so
without any interaction.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/0xzCGLqbOFMcDGVvM1Z2.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="722", height="180" %}

Author: Added.

### Expected short-term impact

> In the short-term, until users get used to the new UI, it is likely that site owners will observe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the short term, and until users get used to the new UI, it is likely that site owners will observe
```

Reviewer: short-term vs. short term. 

This is one of the more confusing rules of English. When the phrase is in a noun position (in this case it's the subject of the preposition) it does not get a hyphen. If it is in an adjective position it does. For example, "It was a short-term gain."

lower grant rates for sites, especially for those that auto-request permissions without priming or

> demanding a user gesture (a [bad practice](https://web.dev/notification-on-start/) anyway). This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
demanding a user gesture (which is considered a [bad practice](https://web.dev/notification-on-start/) anyway). This
```

acknowledged downside is vastly outweighed by the less interruptive experience.

### Best practices

It is up to the site to ensure it provides the necessary context and only requests permissions at
the appropriate and expected moment. Permissions that have been temporarily blocked—through a user
ignoring the request or dismissing the prompt—can request the permission again within the same
session. Only do this if the permission is essential for the site or feature to work, otherwise it
runs the risk of annoying users and getting auto blocked. In those cases we show the
[quiet messaging](https://blog.chromium.org/2020/01/introducing-quieter-permission-ui-for.html) that

> was introduced in Chrome 80. For more general guidance, see the article

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was introduced in Chrome 80. For more general guidance, see
```

[Permission UX](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/push-notifications/permission-ux).

## Outlook and conclusions

> At the moment, the chip appears side by side next to the padlock, but the intention is to override

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, the chip appears side-by-side with the padlock, but the intention is to override
```

Reviewer: 'appears next to the padlock' would have worked too.

> the padlock in the future and add closer association of permissions and the site information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the padlock in the future and add closer association between permissions and the site information
```

Reviewer: Is 'site information surface' different from 'site information'? I'm not really sure what you're getting at with this sentence.

Author: The surface explicitly refers to the screen real estate used for displaying the site info.

> surface. There are also plans on showing a confirmation with additional feedback on the decision
> made. The Chrome team is also investigating potentially more aggressive auto-blocking of permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
surface. There are also plans to show a confirmation with additional feedback on the user's decision.
The Chrome team is also investigating potentially more aggressive auto-blocking of permissions
```

based on prior behavior. You will learn about the news here once these plans mature.

> Concluding, the new UI reduces the perceived insistence on a decision and improves the experience of
> browsing. Since most permission prompts are blocked or ignored, the met objective was to improve the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concluding, the new UI reduces the perceived insistence on a decision and improves the browsing
experience. Since most permission prompts are blocked or ignored, the met objective was to improve the
```

> general experience of browsing, all while not breaking the flows where showing a permission prompt
> and the user granting the permission are essential for the use case at hand to succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
general experience of browsing, while not breaking user flows while showing a permission prompt,
especially in situations where permissions are required to complete a use case.
```

authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2022-02-01
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/K7jiiutmZA0DvzGU9irA.jpg
alt: Computer user in front of a desktop computer.
tags:
  - chrome-97
---

## The permissions UX until now

When a user visits a site that requests a permission, a bubble pops up to prompt the user to make a
decision. For example, below you can see the geolocation permission prompt as implemented in Chrome
up to version 96. (You can try this and other permissions on our demo site
[permission.site](https://permission.site/).)

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/dVZNzWjq3wBsRY4E7ShO.png", alt="Chrome geolocation permission prompt", width="690", height="432" %}

### Most permission prompts are ignored or dismissed

Chrome's telemetry data proves that a lot of permission prompts are ignored. You can explore the
[notification permission data](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2020/02/notification-permission-data-in-crux)
in the Chrome UX report yourself. For now, consider the table below that shows
how Windows users reacted to the geolocation and the notification prompts on sites in an accumulated way:

> <div class="table-wrapper scrollbar">

Reviewer 2: Are the geolocation numbers available publicly as part of the CRUX report? Wanted to check it was okay publishing these figures.

Author: We just have notifications in there. Let's remove geolocation for now, the point will get across still.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Action</th>
<th>Percent of geolocation prompts</th>
<th>Percent of notification prompts</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Allow</td>
<td>8.09%</td>
<td>6.69%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Block</td>
<td>6.47%</td>
<td>9.20%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dismiss</td>
<td>36.12%</td>
<td>35.76%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ignore</td>
<td>49.22%</td>
<td>47.19%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

Given an ignore/dismiss rate of approximately 85%, and especially given how much the prompt stands out and
insists on users making a decision immediately, there is a conflict between the level of urgency
assumed by the browser versus the user's preference for waiting to make a decision. This creates the

> perception that it's "annoying" for a site to ask for a permission.

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth mentioning, no decision made == general annoyance, from extra things to dismiss, including all the things in the site content like cookie consent, newsletter sign ups etc, contributes to a poor experience.

Author: Added.

## New design

> From Chrome 97 on, we therefore introduced an animated chip UI which appears next to the lock

Reviewer 2: The 1% rollout is from M98.

> From Chrome 97 on, we therefore introduced an animated chip UI which appears next to the lock

Author: Fixed in #2075.

whenever a permission is requested. This consists of an icon and label describing the permission being
requested. Our aim was to improve the experience of web browsing while avoiding permission requests
that are generally unnecessary for the vast majority of users and frequently ignored or dismissed.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/SsFtKKnZzbkAovNkX4Lt.png", alt="Google search engine results page showing a search for pizza and the permissions chip with 'Use your location?' label.", width="653", height="229" %}

Author: I can create a video, no worries.

The existing prompt bubble will be shown when the request chip is clicked (if not already shown) and
the request UI is automatically augmented with the request bubble based on the heuristics listed
below:

- The permission was triggered through a user gesture when interacting with the site itself rather
  than automatically triggered by the site.
- The permission is deemed essential and generally non-spammy. Currently this includes camera,
  microphone, and camera paired with microphone.

### Flow of the new design

#### Without user gesture

For non-essential permissions not triggered by a gesture, the prompt no longer intrudes on the site
contents, and does not insist on an immediate decision. The user can ignore the request chip until
they have enough information to make a decision.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/sLmK0PKtJzSLegl7VBLM.png", alt="Flow diagram going from padlock to the geolocation prompt, which, if dismissed, results in the 'geolocation blocked' icon, which, after a four second delay, is finally replaced with the padlock again.", width="800", height="292" %}

Reviewer 2: Maybe these flow images can be without the header text. I can grab these from slide deck. 

Also currently we don't transition from the lock to the chip, although that is the future intention.

Author: If you can send me the SVGs, this would be great.

In the short term, and until users get used to the new UI, it is likely that site owners will observe
lower grant rates for sites, especially for those that auto-request permissions without priming or
demanding a user gesture (which is considered a [bad practice](https://web.dev/notification-on-start/) anyway). This
acknowledged downside is vastly outweighed by the less interruptive experience.

### Best practices

It is up to the site to ensure it provides the necessary context and only requests permissions at
the appropriate and expected moment. Permissions that have been temporarily blocked—through a user
ignoring the request or dismissing the prompt—can request the permission again within the same
session. Only do this if the permission is essential for the site or feature to work, otherwise it
runs the risk of annoying users and getting auto blocked. In those cases we show the
[quiet messaging](https://blog.chromium.org/2020/01/introducing-quieter-permission-ui-for.html) that
was introduced in Chrome 80. For more general guidance, see
[Permission UX](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/push-notifications/permission-ux).

## Outlook and conclusions

> At the moment, the chip appears side-by-side with the padlock, but the intention is to override

Author: Sounds good.

the padlock in the future and add closer association between permissions and the site information
surface. There are also plans to show a confirmation with additional feedback on the user's decision.
The Chrome team is also investigating potentially more aggressive auto-blocking of permissions
based on prior behavior. You will learn about the news here once these plans mature.

Concluding, the new UI reduces the perceived insistence on a decision and improves the browsing
experience. Since most permission prompts are blocked or ignored, the met objective was to improve the
general experience of browsing, while not breaking user flows when showing a permission prompt,
especially in situations where permissions are required to complete a use case.

> 

Author: Added.
